>> Richard Feldman: So I did say that
I was gonna mention a little bit about
generating polymorphic functions, so let's
sort of talk through that real quick.
So a Bool is 1 byte in memory and
a Number is 8 bytes in memory.
This is true in most languages.
Actually, in WebAssembly,
it's a little bit different.
For kind of some strange
[LAUGH] design reasons,
they don't support things
as small as 1 byte.
But in most programming languages,
a Bool is 1 byte, and a Number is 8 bytes.
This affects Array<Bool> and
Array<Number>, like, for example,
let's suppose I wanted to
implement a function called push.
And I'm just using
the TypeScript syntax for
this to say this is
a generic type parameter.
Basically, it's like, give me an array,
and that is an array of T,
whatever T is, the T is a type variable.
I'm not saying exactly what it is,
I can push numbers, I can push strings,
I can push booleans.
Then you, of course,
need to give me the actual thing to push.
Now, the problem with this is, knowing
what we just learned about WebAssembly,
where you have to be very, very
specific about, this is the operation.
It's 64-bit floating point integer.
So this is exactly this,
it's exactly this much memory,
the array elements need to take
up exactly this much space.
What do you do when you have a function
that's polymorphic and yet you have
potentially different arguments that
are like, they just are different sizes?
That's just a true thing about them
in the world, how do you deal with
that when you're asked to write machine
code that is only dealing with one size?
So, I mean, I guess you could sort of,
bottom line is basically like, yeah,
push is supposed to add
onto the end of the array.
Tell me, WebAssembly programmer,
how many bytes would you like me
to add to the end of your array?
And the answer can't just be T,
that's not a number.
You gotta pick, is it 1 byte?
Is 8 bytes?
Is it 4 bytes?
And the answer varies based
on who's calling push.
So, there are a couple of
different ways to do this, but
really they boil down to two that are more
popular than really anything else.
So the first one is hidden runtime data.
Sometimes people will call
this dictionary parsing,
although that also sometimes has to
do with other forms of polymorphism,
like ad hoc polymorphism, but
it can be used for this too.
Basically what this means is, we're gonna
pay a runtime cost in the form of extra
memory that goes along with some
combination of the function itself.
That's being passed to the function,
and/or follows the data structure around
that just is like, hey, I made bytes big.
And then the function's like, hey,
when you get passed in, I need to see that
little extra piece of metadata that you've
got that says how many bytes you are.
So I know how many bytes I need to push
onto the end of this array for you.
So basically, if this works, whenever we
call push with a different type for T,
we also pass we being the compiler author.
We don't make the programmer
deal with this.
We're just sort of like, yeah, when we're
generating the WebAssembly byte code, or
if we're compiling the JavaScript,
when we join the JavaScript code,
we're just gonna pass
that information along.
There's just gonna be an extra argument
that function, then you'd know about.
As the user, you don't see that thing.
What we can do when we're in the code
generation step is we can just sneak
things in.
We can code generate whatever we want,
it doesn't have to have anything
to do with what you wrote.
And this is a very common technique, it's
just like you just silently generate this
extra thing and you pass it
around from function to function.
Not just to push, but to all the things
that are leading up to the call chain to
that, cuz they all need to
be able to get it there.
Has some runtime memory cost, but
at the end of the day this is not only
a way to contain information like
how many bytes T takes up, but
also you can do lots of
other things with this.
There're plenty of nice language features
where this is a perfectly reasonable way
to implement them,
including ad hoc polymorphism.
Like operator overloading, or
being able to customize how equals works,
or things like that.
Now, the downside, of course, is that
it's not only more memory usage, but
also some more runtime logic.
You have to decide at runtime, okay,
I'm gonna go do this versus
I'm gonna go do that.
Which leads us to approach number 2,
which is monomorphization.
So polymorphism, the poly meaning many,
so you have multiple morphs,
multiple different forms.
Monomorphization is where you're like,
okay, go from many forms down to one.
And the idea here is, essentially,
whenever we call push with a different
type for T, we just create
a specialized version of the function.
So this is kind of analogous to what we
did at the type level when we were calling
these functions.
Remember we made our duplicated
special type in our type database.
And we just sort of filled it in
with stuff that was specific to that
by unifying it with,
you're calling it with a number?
Great, we'll unify it with number, and
then our special little version here is
just gonna go unify with number,
and that's fine.
Monomorphization is basically taking
exactly the same idea, except instead of
doing it for your types, we're actually
doing it for the code generation.
So literally, like every single time you
call push with a different type for T,
we are generating a entirely different
copy-pasted implementation of push that's
exactly the same.
Except instead of 8 bytes,
it says 1 byte or
4 bytes in all the different places
where that comes up in that function.
The rest of the function
is exactly the same.
So inside that function, T is no
longer polymorphic, it is concrete, or
another word for that is monomorphic.
So basically, if you look at one of these
specialized functions that we generated,
the copy-pasted and the substituted in
the specific number for those things,
there's no polymorphism left in there.
So they don't need this extra
runtime passing around thing because
we've created a specialized
one that's metamorphic.
Now, this does mean that you are doing a
lot more function generation, you're gonna
get maybe ten different versions of
copy-pasted versions of the push function.
But you don't have extra
runtime data to pass around.
Now, there is, on the one hand, some
debate, and on the other hand also some
consensus around which of these
two approaches is sort of quote,
unquote faster.
So all of the high performance languages,
so you're talking your Rust and your C++,
if they have polymorphism, they do it
this way, they do the monomorphism thing.
This does involve, your binaries will
theoretically get bigger potentially
because you're generating multiple
instantiations of these functions.
Binaries getting bigger also can
have an implication on performance.
But the general consensus is that
overall it's the net win and
a pretty significant one.
And actually the main reason for
that is the way that this
interacts with the optimizers.
So if you're monomorphizing, you've got
your specialized version that's for
8 bytes and your other one that's for
4 bytes or whatever else,
those all get to get optimized separately.
And so, because getting to optimize
different versions of a function
separately can bring different benefits,
especially if they're being optimized
under different circumstances.
Quite often compilers will just choose
to make different specializations of
functions anyway just so
the optimizer can get their hands
on different versions of them.
So the downside in practice, if you're
comparing to a completely unoptimized
version that's not doing any inling,
that's a really significant downside.
But it gets sort of murkier and
the downside start to fade away a little
bit if were you actually comparing it to
somebody with the optimizer
is doing a lot of inlining.
Generating bytecode, basically just same
kind of thing as generating strings,
except that it's bytes instead of strings.
Concatenating bytes together instead of
strings, magic numbers that are referenced
via constants instead of constants that
are referring to more familiar things.
We do a little code touring, kind of
looked at how that looks in practice.
And finally, we talked a little bit
about generating polymorphic functions.
Guess we're a little bit out of order,
cuz we kind of already went and
did the exercises.
But on that note, we can go ahead and
move on to the wrap up,
unless there are any questions
about co-generation.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes.
>> Speaker 2: The monomorphism that you
were mentioning earlier kind of as a way
of handling polymorphism,
as representation of polymorphism.
Is that a similar mechanism behind
things like dynamic dispatch?
Or would we be doing that
earlier in the pipeline?
>> Richard Feldman: Dynamic dispatch and
static dispatch.
Well, so static dispatch would
certainly happen earlier.
So static dispatch would be something that
would happen back in the type checking.
The static and static dispatch is short
for statically typed kind of like.
So it's all based on types and
that would happen before this.
So you could have static or
dynamic dispatch and
also monomorphization, or
dictionary passing or something else.